---
author: rlc
comments: true
date: 2014-07-15 02:31:30+00:00
layout: post
title: "Re: E-mail"
wordpress_id: 3217
categories:
  - Opinions
tags:
  - e-mail
---

The Globe&Mail; dedicated half a page of the Report on Business section to managing your inbox today. People who work with me know that

1. if you want to get ahold of me quickly, E-mail is not the way to go
2. if you want a thought-out, thorough response, E-mail _is_ the way to go

<!--more-->

I check my E-mail twice a day -- three times at most. E-mail from VIPs (my wife, my dad, clients -- some, not all) takes precedence, then bills, then support requests, then other requests, then everything else.

I allow myself two working days to respond, if I decide to respond at all. I **do not** respond to

- informational messages
- uninteresting messages
- chit-chat & chatter
- anything that doesn't interest me enough to respond

I don't see it as impolite to not respond to E-mail: E-mail is by no means equivalent to a hand-written letter -- it's often more like a lengthy tweet, and I routinely ignore tweets -- as I'm sure you do too.

I do respond to anything that gets through the filter: new correspondents that have genuine questions (and are real people), people that made it to my VIP list, etc. will get a response -- within 48 hours, not counting Sundays[^1].

[^1]: By my grandmother's definition: any Christian holiday is a Sunday.

This means that **if you want to get ahold of me quickly, E-mail is not the way to go:** this may be frustrating to some of my colleagues sometimes, but I am usually available through several IM services, SMS, Skype or phone (if you do phone me and I don't pick up, or if you IM me and I don't answer, I'm probably in a meeting. Leave a message or try again later. Only VIPs are allowed to declare emergencies, and know what to do to declare one).

Should I choose to respond to your E-mail, don't expect a novel: if a single word suffices, that'll be it (maybe followed by a "Regards, rlc") -- after all, anything more would just take you longer to read, and would therefore waste both our time.
If, however, you've said something really thought-provoking, _or_ you very obviously have no clue and genuinely need help, I will sit down, get out an actual computer, and write a complete response with real sentences.
Regrettably, lately, E-mails that warranted real sentences have mostly fallen into the "genuinely need help" category, which is when the nice guy in me takes over...

If your E-mail is your first communication with me, please include a means to IM you (if you have one). It'll allow me to get back to you more efficiently -- which tends to be better for both of us.

I really am a nice guy, open to communication. I just have been trying to avoid the G&M;'s "five mistakes" for a long time now.

1. I have no obligation to _always_ be available -- and neither do you

2. it is _not_ ill-mannered to not reply to E-mail: it is ill-mannered to not invest an effort in a communication that is proportionate to the effort invested by the other party -- none is proportionate to little

3. short E-mails are not rude: they're efficient

4. urgent and important trumps important. Important trumps urgent.

The fifth pitfall, not using your inbox as a TODO list, is up for discussion: I tend to flag E-mails that I need to get back to -- but I don't see it as a TODO list (more like a "read this again sitting down" kinda thing).

---

A clipping of the newspaper article that prompted this is [here](http://www.pinterest.com/pin/438960294903627744/)
