---
author: rlc
categories:
- Personal Blog
- Cybersecurity
- Quantum Computing
comments: true
date: 2021-08-26
layout: post
slug: weird
tags:
- Blogging (0.9)
- Pandemic (0.8)
- Florida (0.7)
- Cybersecurity (0.8)
- Quantum Computing (0.9)
- Writing (0.7)
- Stasis Pod (0.5)
- Life (0.6)
title: Wow, this is weird
---

The last time I wrote anything on this blog was more than 20 months ago. Back then, I had just come back from spending Christmas with friends and family in Florida. Since then, we've been in a global pandemic and no-one in their right mind would go to Florida.
<!--more-->
Now, it's not like I've been in a stasis pod for 20 months and just woke up: quite a few things have been going on. For one, I started a new blog a few weeks ago called [Applied Paranoia](https://applied-paranoia.com). I have every intention to spend some free time writing about cybersecurity for that blog, so I thought I'd announce it here in the off chance that someone still reads this blog after this long a hiatus.

Still, it's weird to figure that in the last 20 months, I've found hardly any time to just write down some thoughts, and the last time I did actually do that (aside from the new blog) was back in 2019, with musings about quantum computing.

Quantum computing is still a *very* interesting subject from my point of view, and it's off-topic for the other blog, so if I do find myself musing about that again, that will probably end up here. That being said, I was actually looking at the source files of this blog to see if there was anything I could scavenge for the new one (much like this blog and the [C++ for the Self-Taught](https://cpp4theselftaught.com) blog share a lot of contents). We'll see how it turns out.

Not making any promises, just noticing the weirdness of life.