---
author: rlc
comments: false
layout: post
categories:
- DNP3
title: Authentication of individual users in DNP3 Secure Authentication: TB2019-001
---
In February of this year, the DNP Technical Committee published TB2019-001: "Authentication of individual users is obsolete in DNP3-SA". This technical bulletin, which was the first work item from the Tech Committee's Secure Authentication Task Force to be published, was the fruit of two and a half years of work between the moment the Tech Committee decided to remove multi-user support and the moment the document was created, edited, reviewed, etc.

In this post, I will take a close look at what the impact of this document is on existing implementations of DNP3: systems, devices and firmware.

# Overview
Secure Authentication in DNP3 (DNP3-SA for short) is entirely based on the secrecy of one, symmetric, shared secret called the "Update Key". This key is used to mutually authenticate between the Master and the Outstation (where the Outstation is DNP terminology for a device in the field somewhere - what other protocols sometimes call a "Slave" - and the Master is the central controlling device that manages one or more Outstations from, for example, a control center). Because that Update Key is symmetric, and is known to both the Master and the Outstation, it can be used to mutually authenticate these two devices in a device-to-device authentication, but it can't be used to authenticate anything *behind* the devices. Particularly, you can't use a symmetric key like this to individually authenticate a person using the Master's user interface.

The way DNP3-SA was specified in IEEE Std 1815&trade;-2012 allowed for different "User IDs" to exist over a single DNP3 link, each having its own Update Key. This was designed to implement RBAC and allow for some level of authentication of individual users, but fell short of being able to actually live up to that promise: because the Master had to know each of the Update Keys to establish a session for any one of them, the Master could effectively impersonate any of its users without the user's knowledge. In other words: on the Outstation's end, the mutual authentication remained with the *Master*, never with the *user behind the Master*.
